---
title: Introduction
description: Learn about the distinctive logic at work in the Science of Logic
isArticle: true
authors: Filip Niklas (2024)
editors: Ahilleas Rokni (2024)
contributors:
---

## Introduction to the Science of Logic

### The Familiar Logic

Logic is the systematic study of valid reasoning, inference, and argumentation.
It deals with principles and rules that govern correct and consistent reasoning.
In essence, logic provides a framework for evaluating the validity of arguments
and determining whether conclusions logically follow from premises. It
encompasses various branches, including propositional logic, predicate logic,
modal logic, and mathematical logic, each with its own set of rules and
applications.

At its core, logic involves analyzing statements or propositions and their
relationships to ascertain whether they lead to a sound and coherent conclusion.
It helps in distinguishing between valid and invalid forms of reasoning,
facilitating clear and rational thinking across different domains, such as
mathematics, philosophy, computer science, and linguistics.

This is logic as it is commonly known to us. In this vein, logic is like
following certain rules when dealing with ideas. Imagine an idea to be a certain
"block" and logic the "rules" for playing with "blocks" in a good way. Just like
how you need to follow certain rules to build a stable and cool structure with
your blocks, logic helps us figure out how to put our ideas together in a way
that makes sense. For example, if you have a red block and a blue block, and
someone says, "All red blocks are big," and you know the red block you have is
small, you can use logic to figure out that the statement is not true for all
red blocks. Hence, logic is like a set of rules that helps us understand if the
things we say or think fit together properly, just like how blocks can fit
together to build something, or, equally, how blocks can be jumbled together
into a pile with no innate consistency or structure.

These definitions of logic all fall short of the self-critical demand of
philosophy.

While for most ordinary and pragmatic pursuits, these definitions of logic work
perfectly fine; as soon as the self-critical lens of philosophy is applied,
however, it becomes readily apparent that there are incoherent gaps or
unwarranted dependencies. A cursory inquiry exposes this: What is valid
reasoning and argumentation? What grounds the principles and rules that govern
correct and consistent thinking? How does a framework that is external to the
issue it looks into have any real authority over that issue if it is really
external to it? What are the conditions for the possibility of rational
thinking; is not _all_ thinking, per definition, rational? Can a thought exist
that is not rational? What even is rationality?

This is why Hegel begins, in the introduction to _The Science of Logic_ (SL),
with the following statement:

> In no science is the need to begin with the fact [ *Sache* ] itself, without
> preliminary reflections, felt more strongly that in the science of logic
> (Hegel 2010, 23/21.27).

The hindrance being thrown ahead is not so much that the functional definitions
of logic are false or bad, but they are, taken as a whole, lacking or
insufficient. And this becomes readily apparent when one thinks carefully
through the questions that the established forms of logic prompt. Said
otherwise, when one turns to think philosophically, the context itself becomes
unbounded and thought is absolutely free in its pursuits.

### The Unfamiliar Logic

The philosophy of logic examines logic not merely in its parts and established
definitions, but also as a whole and questions what has been established. To
follow our toy example, in philosophy one is not only concerned with blocks and
how they possibly fit together, but also "what is a block", what does it mean
for blocks (or anything) "to fit together", how do blocks "emerge" or have they
"always been there", or is it the _pattern_ itself of how things fit that has
always been there? When we apply this line of thinking to actual logic, our
concern becomes, to use the example of syllogism (a pattern of inference): what
is a syllogism, how are the major and minor premises constituted to create the
conclusion, how do premises emerge or are they latent within one, is the
syllogistic pattern mutable or immutable? Now apply this line of inquiry not to
any particular logical rule, but to logic itself! Besides the intense inquiry
into the nature of things, philosophy does not dismiss ordinary or familiar
notions of logic (or any concept) but takes them seriously. Indeed, it is out of
wonder and curiosity of _how_ and _why_ things work the way they work that first
elicits one to investigate more closely.

The barrier that the familiar notion of logic had erected has begun to break
down. It is understood inquiring into logic as a pre-established set of rules
for reasoning, inference and argumentation induce questions of justification
when examined under a philosophical, unbounded lens. But one may decide at this
point to hold on to these established notions and instead work backwards to
discover a common foundation. Notice how this leaves precisely the core issue
unattended, namely, the established concepts themselves! In pinning a certain
logical idea and then setting out to inquire into its presuppositions leaves
that very idea as _the_ presupposition. For example, if one decides to inquire
into the nature of propositions (S is P) by looking at what is the subject, what
is the predicate and what is their connection, one takes no less for granted
that there is such a thing as the proposition. But then what grounds the
proposition as such? Here one can continue to attempt to pursue the same track
by looking at constituents or presuppositions, or one can short circuit the line
of inquiry itself and see that no pre-established, familiar idea will adequately
answer the demand of self-critical thought.

This is what Hegel has in mind when speaking of the _need to begin with the fact
itself, **without preliminary reflections**_. In fully self-critical philosophy,
where the context is unbounded (if it at all makes sense to speak of a context),
one cannot take for granted any pre-established notion or logical set of rules
such that one must make an _absolute beginning_. Indeed, taken to its extreme,
this rigorous inquiry necessarily purges not only the typical associations of
familiar logic (rules, propositions, syllogism, etc.) but also the less standard
ones such as reality, world, negation, certainty, truth, infinity, finitude,
form, content, matter, thing, property and a host of others. These _categories_
are basically dropped, and, crucially, any sense of externality along with them.

> In every other science, the matter that it treats, and the scientific method,
> are distinguished from each other; the content, moreover, does not make an
> absolute beginning but is dependent on other concepts and is connected on all
> sides with other material (Hegel 2010, 23/21.27).

This sense of _absolute beginning_ requires one to think of logic not as
relative to its subject matter, or as a certain form that merely structures some
other content, but _being both at once_. At the outset of its inquiry, logic
cannot be distinguished from its matter and it cannot be dependent on anything
else but itself.

This finally crumbles the initial edifice established by the familiar notion. In
this [presuppositionless thinking](/hegel/guides/presuppositionless-thinking)
about logic, the decision has been taken to suspend the customary meanings of
rules and laws of thinking, and thus upend the usual procedures and
methodologies. With no established idea, category, method or notion, one
strictly cannot declare in advance of its thinking what logic is or will be.
Strictly speaking then, as Hegel says: "Logic, therefore, cannot say what it is
in advance, rather does this knowledge of itself only emerge as the final result
and completion of its whole treatment. ...its concept is generated in the course
of this elaboration and cannot therefore be given in advance" (Hegel 2010,
23/21.27). No idea or concept can be pinned, established or simply put before
us. Our blocks and their patterns melt away. Indeed, the very sense of logic
vanishes.

### At the Beginning

One thus is, albeit in a highly expedited way, transported to the place of
absolute beginning, the place where the inquiry into logic can begin in earnest.
Yet, at this point a final hurdle remains that bars the deployment of thinking
positively what logic is and that is the problem of beginnings. More
technically, it is the issue concerning the nature of beginnings which
surreptitiously seem to pre-determine their ends. We see that echoes of a
distinction between form and content, logic and its subject matter, persist.
Doing philosophy of logic then is less a set procedure with definite steps as it
is a continual refinement of distilling the adequate conceptions according to
the skill of one's craft. This is owing in no small measure to the fact that
logic and its actual thinking are deeply intertwined. But this does not diminish
the idea of clear resolutions and definite determinations, but it does diminish
the idea that that is all there is to logic. As it will be seen, logic is far
more strange and wondrous than is usually given credit, and that logic in its
full scope both contains and transcends a living, self-correcting evolution and
is the universally eternal touchstone of truth.

> Only after a more profound acquaintance with the other sciences does logic
> rise for subjective spirit from a merely abstract universal to a universal
> that encompasses within itself the riches of the particular: in the same way a
> moral maxim does not possess in the mouth of a youngster who otherwise
> understands well the meaning and scope that it has in the spirit of a man with
> a lifetime of experience, to whom therefore the weight of its content is
> expressed in full force. Thus logic receives full appreciation of its value
> only when it comes as the result of the experience of the sciences; then it
> displays itself to spirit as the universal truth, not as a _particular_
> cognition _alongside_ another material and other realities, but as the essence
> rather of this further content (Hegel 2010, 37/21.42).

## Other Predispositions Considered

Hegel considers a number of other typical approaches to logic and its relation
to thinking. These help to further specify the determination of logic that Hegel
intends to work with. The following issues are explored in more technical
detail, but they all revolve around the core issue of logic being merely
something external to concrete reality and formally dependent on it instead of
being the self-determining essence of reality.

### Logic as Mere Form

When logic is considered as a science or knowledge of thinking, it is first
understood that this thinking is "_the mere form_" of cognition that abstracts
from all content (Hegel 2010, 24/21.28). This has two consequences: Firstly,
logic or thinking as mere form is completely devoid of any internal truth and
acts merely as the stepping stone to another's. Secondly, logic is wholly
dependent on extraneous matter to be given to it, for it itself consists only
for _formal conditions_ and not of any _real truth_. Moreover, it can be seen
here that logic is taken _externally_ to its subject matter, which holds latent
an unquestioned metaphysical assumption. As Hegel notes:

> Presupposed _from the start_ is that the material of knowledge is present in
> and for itself as a ready-made world outside thinking; that thinking is by
> itself empty, that it comes to this material as a form from outside, fills
> itself with it, and only then gains a content, thereby becoming real knowledge
> (Hegel 2010, 24/21.28).

Kantian undertones of blind intuitions and empty concepts can also be found in
this assumption (although, to be fair to Kant, he was working from a different
context)(Kant 1998, 194/A51). The idea being that logic or thought are devoid of
any truth _until_ material from the world (which itself is ready-made and
complete unto itself) is given to it.

The further consequence of this assumption is that logic and its subject matter
(here the world) are utterly different from each other; "each turns out to be a
sphere divorced from the other" (Hegel 2010, 24/21.29). As Hegel notes, this
leads exactly to the Kantian position of thing-in-itself, since logic or thought
are utterly other to the world, the world is a complete thing unto itself
logically prior it being given as material for cognition as intuitions. In other
words, the world cannot be thought of with any certainty prior to its
experience; or, put differently still, thought is incapable of coming to any
resolution about its subject matter (be that the world, existence or anything).

If one pursues this line of thought further, then it effectively means that
_thought is incapable of coming to any conclusions about itself_. Thought, as
well as logic, are merely the formal instruments of experience that await
reception of worldly material; prior to which thought is unable to think.
Thought and logic in this view are _externally determined_, not
_self-determining_. Put bluntly, then, according to this perspective thought
cannot think. One does not make up one's own mind about something, but only ever
reacts to certain sensuous data.

A further conclusion of this thread is that the world itself, or any subject
matter of logic, is inherently _illogical_. This is the other side of that stark
difference between logic and its subject matter. Since logic is mere form and
this form requires material, the world cannot with any definitive resolution be
understood to be logically _prior_ to its reception as material for cognition.
We cannot speak of a reality outside experience. Hence, one is firmly placed in
the Kantian position that posits the world _as such_ to be a
_thing-in-itself_.[^1]

[^1]:
    It can be seen that just as thought is downstream from pure concepts and
    sensuous intuitions, the whole logic of the argument is itself heteronomous.
    Just as thought must assume worldly material given to it, so the
    transcendental argument itself turns around the world as given, despite
    positing its source as irrational. (Niklas)

Hegel notes that the manner one here views logic and its subject matter, thought
and the world, subject and object, is in _phenomenal_ terms. But he calls it a
prejudice to carry over this view into reason and logic. His argument is that it
is incoherent from the start since the phenomenal attempts to make a
metaphysical claim, but the former is exactly not the latter. That is, the scope
of what one experiences sensuously is less than what can be thought, so it is
wrong to apply the standard of the former upon the latter. The way one
experiences things through the senses cannot be the standard for how everything
is evaluated. Indeed, senses do not in the strict sense evaluate. This is not to
say that experience is not real or important, but it is being misused if it is
taken out of its scope. This miscarriage of logic is simply classed as an error
and Hegel notes how it can be an impediment to philosophical thinking.

> ...when these prejudices are carried over to reason, as if in reason the same
> relation obtained, as if this relation had any truth in and for itself, then
> they are errors, and the refutation of them in every part of the spiritual and
> natural universe is what philosophy is; or rather,since they block the
> entrance to philosophy, they are the errors that must be removed before one
> can enter it (Hegel 2010, 25/21.29).

Curiously, the ancient thinkers, Hegel continues, had a higher conception of
thinking since it was reasoned that only things known in thought, as opposed to
known immediately, where understood to be the truth of the matter. It is, then,
not what is _first_ experienced that is considered true, but what is _thought_
to be so. For example, in the distance an object may appear as a shipwreck but
coming closer it becomes apparent that the object is actually a peculiar hut.
Did the object itself morph between the two states? No, one reasons that
perception gave a certain impression at one point and a different form another,
but that the object had been what it was in both respects. One simply comes to
_realize_ what the thing really was. Here thought is not alien to the world but
is immanent to it, "the _things_ and the _thinking_ of them agree in and for
themselves (also our language expresses a kinship between them)" (Hegel 2010,
25/21.29).

### The Conflict of Determinations

Hegel complains that the understanding has taken hold of philosophy, and that,
what is worse, ordinary common sense is granted dominion over the evaluation of
the the truth about all things. Ordinary common sense being rooted in sensuous
reality with the notion that thoughts are _only_ thoughts. Essentially, this
view is uncritical and philosophically naive. Mention to Kant and his
transcendental philosophy will be made here, as it is a prime example of this
view. Kant's philosophy is rooted in the idea that thoughts are _only_ thoughts
and that real knowledge is the intertwining of thoughtful form and worldly
impressions.

However, Hegel detects a more serious obstacle in this thinking when it is
attempted to be philosophically applied. When, according to this naive position,
thoughts are _only_ thoughts and that real knowledge is the intertwining of
thoughtful form and worldly impressions, it can be easily missed that what are
assumed to be conflicts of the world are really conflicts of ideas. In Hegel's
more technical vocabulary, it is _the conflict of determinations_ (see also Kant
1998, 459/A405/B432).

> The basis of the [conception of modern philosophy is] in the insight into the
> _necessary conflict_ of the determinations of the understanding with
> themselves. - The reflection already mentioned consists in _transcending_ the
> concrete immediate, in determining* and \_parting* it. But this reflection
> must _equally transcend_ its _separating_ determinations and above all
> _connect_ them. The conflict of determinations breaks out precisely at the
> point of connection. This reflective activity of connection belongs in itself
> to reason, and to rise above the determinations ad attain insight into their
> discord is the great negative step on the way to the true concept of reason
> (Hegel 2010, 26/21.30).

When logic is not considered on its own terms but merely in relation to sensuous
existence, one fails to grasp that logic is in fact in conflict with itself.
Discord and struggle are not exclusive to the domain of worldly reality but are
also&mdash;perhaps more intensely&mdash;active in the domain of logic and
reason. Philosophy disciplines the ability to distinguish what is proper to each
domain and being able to understand when an apparent conflict belongs to worldly
reality, the realm of pure logic or is an erroneous mismatch between the two.

Hegel notes a further error in the case where one is discouraged by a
contradiction in the understanding and resolves to find accord and stability in
sensuous reality. But, and here Hegel criticizes the Kantian transcendental
standpoint once more, if one resolves to look to sensuous reality as the
criterion of truth, in the same instance one cannot determine the thing in
question to have _any_ independent truth since the truth of the matter is
settled _only_ as it appears. "This is like attributing right insight to
someone," Hegel writes, "with the stipulation, however, that he is not fit to
see what is true but only what is false" (Hegel 2010, 26/21.30). To put this
another way, if by truth one understands an independent standard, then this
immediately clashes with the knowledge that one acquires through appearances,
since knowing here is totally dependent on appearances and cannot make _any_
independent claims about the matter at hand. To emphasize this point further, if
the transcendental arrangement is actually granted, then one cannot truly speak
of laws of nature or even state that the sky is there the moment one turns one's
gaze towards the ground. This is why, if Hegel is right, this claim that
sensuous reality is the sole arbiter of truth leads to absurdity.

Finally, Hegel then points out that as the understanding (according to
transcendental idealism) cannot apply its determinations or concepts to things
in themselves, it must therefore mean that these determinations are in
themselves something untrue and consequently cannot be turned upon itself or
anything else related to pure reason. The standard set for the understanding is
based on experience and empirical objects, but the categories that define these
empirical objects are not themselves empirical&mdash;they are precisely
pure&mdash;and so the categories of the understanding cannot apply to anything
other than sensuous reality. But this is incoherent, since the categories
themselves are pure, their validity cannot come from sensuous reality. "If they
cannot be determinations of _the thing in itself_, still less can they be
determinations of the _understanding_, to which one ought to concede at least
the dignity of a thing" (Hegel 2010, 27/21.31). In this Kantian regime,
according to Hegel, one cannot consistently use the tools by which the
understanding navigates the world to also navigate the realm of ideas and
thoughts, with the result being that the understanding (or the mind) cannot be a
thing, much less be said to exist.

The cause for this error, Hegel diagnoses, lies in the fact that the
determinations or categories of the understanding were never given an
independent examination and immanent deduction but were simply taken for
granted.

#### On the Absurdity of Knowledge Based on Appearances (Niklas)

Further observations may be drawn regarding the absurdity of truth vis-à-vis
appearances (what we can call the double-standard of knowledge) in inspecting
its implicit elements. When it is posited that knowledge is split by way of
subject matters, and that of certain subject matters one can know nothing about
(such as things-in-themselves) but others one can have knowledge (such as what
appears in experience), knowledge remains the common element in both. The
incoherence may be traced to an unstated third element that orchestrates the
mediation between knowledge based on appearances and knowledge as such. This
third element can be either one of the two extremes (knowledge based on
appearances or knowledge as such) or something else entirely. It seems that,
according to Hegel, if transcendental idealism is taken at face value, one
subscribes to the view that knowledge based on appearances grounds both itself
and knowledge as such, yet Hegel's criticism is that this precisely leads to
absurdity which subsequently must mean that Kant merely takes for granted either
that knowledge as such grounds both itself and knowledge based on appearances or
that there is another third, yet unknown, common denominator. The latter seems
to align well with Kant's own thinking in the _First Critique_:

> All that seems necessary for an introduction or a preliminary is that there
> are two stems of human cognition, which may perhaps arise from a common but to
> us unknown root, namely sensibility and understanding, through the first of
> which objects are given to us, but through the second of which they are
> thought (Kant 1998, 135/A15).

In fairness to Kant, however, more emphasis is placed on pure concepts as the
argument of transcendental idealism develops. Kant, in contrast to Hume, places
pure categories or pure concepts in the purview of reason such that these cannot
have their validity or truth established by sensuous reality, but that, rather,
they serve to establish the validity and truth of sensuous reality. There are
also a number of other key concepts&mdash;called _concepts of reason_&mdash;that
never directly interact with sensuous reality, such as ethical principles or the
concept of world (Kant 1998, 394/A311). Indeed, concepts of reason are in this
way genuinely unconditional. With these things in mind, the thrust of Hegel's
criticism is somewhat blunted, since Kant's argumentation does not _entirely_
rest on the intertwining of thoughtful form and sensuous impressions. Yet
Hegel's real target is the fact that transcendental idealism has invalid or weak
means to establish the truth of the very tools of cognition it purports to use
to establish truth _tout court_.

The take-home message thus being that, if Hegel is right, philosophy cannot but
begin with metaphysics or, if it deigns to begin elsewhere, such as the
instrument of cognition or conscious experience, be forced to take for granted a
bad one.

### Logic as Non-Metaphysical

> [W]hat is commonly understood by logic is considered with a total disregard of
> metaphysical significance.

<p
    style={{ textAlign: "right" }}
    className="nx-border-gray-300 nx-italic nx-text-gray-700 dark:nx-border-gray-700 dark:nx-text-gray-400"
>
    (Hegel 2010, 27/21.31-2)
</p>

What is crucially omitted in typical discussions concerning logic is its state
with regards to reality. Logic is not usually understood to exist in the same
way a tree or a squirrel exists (i.e. a _thing_), and Hegel admits that logic
does not have the kind of content that comes readily available unless one thinks
about it carefully. However, this is not due to the nature of logic as much as
it is with how it is being used. "Scattered in fixed determinations and thus not
held together in organic unity, they are dead forms and the spirit which is
their vital concrete unity does not reside in them" (Hegel 2010, 27/21.32).
While the language here is somewhat lofty, the underlying point is clear: when
logic is considered merely as a settled structure, it is not considered how its
many forms and patterns hang together, and especially how they are understood
vis-à-vis the thinking mind, which leaves logic immutable and insubstantial.
These features of logic&mdash;when formally considered&mdash;become brittle and
arbitrary when the full weight of the self-critical, demand of freedom is
brought to bear.

This non-metaphysical, or formal, logic must continually seek a content outside
of itself in order to become something meaningful. Formal logic must deal with
objects of the world if it is to determine something substantial, such as how
various natural things behave. But Hegel's claim is that logic _does_ have a
content of its own; it does have something internally meaningful&mdash;at a
minimum _it is_ the concrete unity that holds together all the fixed,
pre-established structures, be they syllogisms, propositions or other
categories. It is not the fault of logic, Hegel says, that it seems empty, but
it is, rather, the way in which it is being understood which is empty (Hegel
2010, 28/21.32). If one begins to inspect how these various logical forms are
connected, one has already begun to leave behind logic as fixed patterns with
the implicit understanding that an integral unity exists. From there, the step
to metaphysics is a small one&mdash;insofar as it is understood that
metaphysics, generally speaking, is the philosophical inquiry into the nature of
reality, existence and universe&mdash;since it is already given to understand
that logic is something that forms part of reality.

### On the Use of the Term Science

The term `science` (German: _Wissenschaft_) is often used by Hegel throughout
his writings and signifies a larger context than what is commonly understood by
the use of the term. Typically, science is understood to entail inquiries
strictly into the natural world or what can be proven empirically. Science thus
is therefore knowledge of empirical reality. Hegel, along with Kant, Fichte and
others of his contemporaries, expand the notion to include also what can be
proven logically. While science, for Hegel, still concerns empirical knowledge,
it is also knowledge of non-empirical items such as logic, metaphysics, ethics,
aesthetics, religion and even knowledge itself. It is perhaps best to think of
knowledge whenever Hegel speaks about science, insofar as knowledge is a
provable conception (logically or empirically) of something that is neither
exclusively objective or subjective. The class of knowledge that is particularly
concerned with logic, metaphysics or knowledge as such is frequently connoted as
pure knowledge or pure science; "pure" because it is knowledge about knowledge,
or science about science, or the subject matter of logic is strictly not
intermingled with anything other than logic itself.

At the start of _The Science of Logic_, the term science is lightly presupposed.
Hegel claims that the concept of science is established in _The Phenomenology of
Spirit_ (another major treatise by Hegel), but that he is cautious of providing
any definitions of it at the outset. This is because any such definitions will
at best be mere assurances. As with all pre-established forms of logic, at the
start of presuppositionless thinking, science too must be emptied of any
preconceived notions of what it is.

However, there is an important caveat to this. While nothing definitive can be
said about science, its conception is presupposed at the start of the _The
Science of Logic_. This conception is the minimal grasp that the fact of the
matter (_die Sache_) is equally the thought of it. This is largely a _negative_
conception, inasmuch as it serves to annul the opposite conception that the fact
of the matter is _different_ from the thought of it. That, according to Hegel,
is an assumption made by consciousness which is ostensibly undermined in _The
Phenomenology_ and which undermining is taken for granted at the start of the
_Logic_. Should it be held that the fact of the matter and its thought are
_fundamentally_ different, or that the difference between subject and object is
unquestionably true, then _The Phenomenology_ aims to prove that conception to
undermine itself and derive a concept of science from that undermining. As Hegel
writes:

> Pure science thus presupposes the liberation (_Befreiung_)[^2] fom the
> opposition of consciousness. It contains _thought in so far as this thought is
> equally the fact as it is in itself;_ or the _fact in itself_ in so far as
> this _is equally pure thought_. As _science_, truth is pure self-consciousness
> as it develops itself and has the shape of the self, so that _that which
> exists in and for itself is the conscious concept and the concept as such is
> that which exists in and for itself_ (Hegel 2010, 29/21.33).

[^2]:
    [Introduction of _The Science of Logic_ in German at Zeno.org](http://www.zeno.org/Philosophie/M/Hegel,+Georg+Wilhelm+Friedrich/Wissenschaft+der+Logik/Erster+Teil.+Die+objektive+Logik/Einleitung/Allgemeiner+Begriff+der+Logik)

Pure science, or pure knowledge, cannot but follow from a freeing of
consciousness in that thinking is able to consider an issue without being bound
to a limited subject-object dichotomy. What Hegel describes here is simply the
free movement of the knowing mind&mdash;an exercise human beings have engaged in
since before history. However, it would be inadequate to regard pure science
merely as any activity that resembles knowing. Hegel adds additional qualifiers
that makes this conception something that is permanently explicit. Science,
strictly speaking then, cannot be merely implicit, but must have itself as its
own object and that object be itself. This is what minimally constitutes pure
science. Furthermore, Hegel goes on to add that pure science or pure logic is
not bereft of self-consciousness but _is it in its purity_. Still further, Hegel
adds the key qualifier that this is not mere pure self-consciousness as was but
as it _develops_ itself. As it will be seen in the _Logic_ itself, and indeed
throughout Hegel's body of work, continuous development and integration are
staple features of the concept.

This is a nexus of many important technical terms. Pure science, pure form, pure
reason, pure knowledge, pure self-consciousness and pure thought. In a manner of
speaking, at the zero level of presuppositionless thinking, all these terms
collapse into the same. Or, they cannot afford any substantial difference that
would set them apart from one another when taken to the extreme of their purity:
pure thought is equally pure logic, and pure logic is equally pure knowledge and
the purity of self-consciousness is pure thought.

One might be tempted to think that this purity makes it a mere formality, but
according to Hegel it is the purity of thought _as it is thinking_ that _is_ the
content. "This objective thinking is thus the _content_ of pure science" (Hegel
2010, 29/21.34). A formality would precisely _lack_ any content of its
own&mdash;much like the familiar conception of logic&mdash;and would be unable
to actually generate a thought. But Hegel points out that the pure form of
thinking considers its own thinking as its content and that content just is the
form of thinking. Put plainly, it is thinking about thinking, no more and no
less.

Logic, then, becomes the _system_ of pure thinking (Hegel 2010, 29/21.34). Here
Hegel omits the connotation "pure" since a system puts into determinacy what
pure thought turns out to be, and determinacy minimally qualifies between what
is and is not. Likewise, this system of pure reason is no less a science of
logic since logic becomes expounded determinately and what it expounds is the
very evolution of logic. This is admittedly looking ahead, since at the start
the very idea of determinacy cannot be left unquestioned. Indeed, if there is to
be a system of logic (or logic as a system), then this too must develop
immanently from pure thought, from the conception of pure science or, as Hegel
wrote above, pure self-consciousness as it unfolds in its own shape.

### The Evolution of Logic

{/* cspell: disable-next-line */}

> [S]ince Aristotle, [logic] has taken no backward step, but also none forward,
> the latter because to all appearances it seems to be finished and complete
> (Hegel 2010, 30/21.35).

While Hegel gives a dismal appraisal of the history of logic since Aristotle,
the issue is as much a philosophical as a social and historical one. The
philosophical issue being that logic is regarded as something inherently
complete and static. "Its determinations," Hegel writes, "are accepted in their
undisturbed fixity and are brought together only in external connection" (Hegel
2010, 32/21.36). Logic, as it is typically known outside a philosophical
context, amounts to something of an accounting of various logical forms which
does not critically assess their immanent connections or attempt to derive a
systematic deduction of the forms themselves. While Hegel speaks here from his
own time about the state of logic, the underlying philosophical assumption is
that the _method_ of logic is itself constant and perfectly concluded.

Curiously, Hegel specifically complains that in his present situation there is
no trace of the scientific method in the typical considerations of logic. While
the scientific method has come to include notions like observations, question,
hypothesis, prediction, experimentation, reproduction, conclusion from
established observation and communication centered around empirical objects,
these items constitute a general idea that is not far off from what Hegel has in
mind here with regards to logic.Namely, that the form of logic itself is
actively failing to live up to standards similar to those of scientific inquiry.
Logic itself and its forms (propositions, inference, categories, etc.) are not
being scientifically examined in accordance with rigorous questioning,
experimentation, reproduction and communication.[^3] Indeed, Hegel points to
empirical science and pure mathematics as having their own suitable methods
whereas this is sorely lacking in the domain of logic. This has led to
philosophy borrowing methods from these other domains and attempting to apply
them to logic, but Hegel thinks that this is an error. It is an error because it
is a method that is being externally applied. Yet, it is equally an error to
crudely reject any method whatsoever.

[^3]:
    It should be noted that while the common scientific method shares much with
    presuppositionless thinking, it cannot perfectly overlap with the method
    concerning pure logic, since a number of notable conditions cannot apply.
    Pure logic cannot be hypothesized about since there is no space between pure
    logic and its subject matter, or pure logic is always categorical and
    actual. Likewise, predictions cannot take place since time is not a factor
    in the development of logic. And while the scientific method is not always a
    linear process, the systematic development of logic must be. Observation
    must also be qualified since pure thought is not concerned with the light
    reflected off any empirical perceptions, but with seeing, as it were,
    through the lens of understanding and reason, into the light of concepts
    themselves. (Niklas)

The method must come from within the treatment logic itself. But how does that
not entail that this method is already established and given? What are the
claims that support that the method of logic is something that is indeed
incomplete and in development? Hegel offers a quick but potent response by
considering a few principles. The fixtures that act as the underlying support
for the typical logical inquiries do not recognize that negation is equally
positive or that contradiction does resolve to an abstract nullity of the matter
at hand but only a negation of a particular form (Hegel 2010, 33/21.38). The
proof of these claims are in _The Phenomenology_, but given these are at least
entertained, then just the idea that the positive and negative overlap or that
contradiction is constructive are enough to seriously upend the restful repose
of logic's typical considerations. To embark on a scientific inquiry of logic
proper, then, requires one to be open to&mdash;if not equipped with&mdash;the
insight that there is more at work in its definitions than is nominally given
and used. In other words, there is more to logic than meets the eye.

While the points Hegel makes with regards to the principles that could be said
to underlie the typical approach to logic are themselves wanting of proof at
this stage, the key takeaway is the fact that whether or not Hegel is right in
undermining these principles, there appears to be some principles necessarily at
work in the naive approach to logic. To just focus on one of these, namely, the
idea that the positive is simply positive and the negative is simply negative
and never the two shall meet, and it is granted that the naive consideration of
logic must entail this, then that is a principle that is simply assumed to be
the case. How is this principle proven? And by which _method_ is this principle
proven? What are the credentials, so to speak, of this method, if there is any?
If Hegel is right, then in the standard considerations of logic, there are
latent unproven assumptions which come to hold fast to an erroneous
conclusion&mdash;such as the idea that logic is complete and finished
_simpliciter_.

The method of logic must come from within the treatment of logic itself _and_
this cannot entail that the method is pre-established and given _a priori_
(before the fact). This is perhaps a radical idea of logic to think that its
very method can take on not only such an _evolutionary_ aspect but that this
also occurs within its own inquiry of itself. But if Hegel is right about the
self-critical demand of presuppositionless thinking, it must systematically
follow.

Yet, Hegel does not pretend that the method developed in the course of the
_Logic_ is itself fully completed and perfected. This is perhaps surprising to
some given that logic would include metaphysical claims, which would entail some
sort of atemporal truth. It is a fertile discussion unto itself just how much of
Hegel's logic is atemporal and historical and where the difference lies, but
that is beyond the scope of this introduction. At this stage, and in keeping
with the basic tenets of presuppositionless thinking, the method itself
is&mdash;and Hegel claims remains&mdash;open to continuous revision. All that is
necessary is that the "method is not something distinct from its subject matter
and content - for it is the content in itself, _the dialectic which it possesses
within itself_, which moves the subject matter forward" (Hegel 2010, 33/21.38).

Finally, one might point to the fact that there must be some pre-established
idea in mind, at the very least since Hegel has written a book, which
necessitates division into sections, headings, etc., that show that not
everything about Hegel's logical project is presuppositionless. Hegel reminds
the reader that these serve nothing else than "indications of content" and are
of essentially historical value. These are the constructions of a compendium
rather than the determinations of the content itself. Or, put more figuratively,
they are the signposts erected _after_ the journey of discovery has been
completed. Once again, Hegel stresses the fact that such divisions do nothing to
elucidate their method. The real deal is in the concepts that are thought in
reading the text. As Hegel writes, "the _necessity_ of the connectedness and the
_immediate emergence_ of distinctions must be found in the treatment of the fact
itself, for it falls within the concept's own progressive determination" (Hegel
2010, 34/21.39). The reader is therefore invited to follow the content exactly
as Hegel did and examine whether or not the various developments and resolutions
indeed follow as Hegel describes.

### Dialectic: The Engine of Logic

If the method of logic is something that emerges, develops and evolves, one is
instinctively prompted by the question of _what_ drives logic itself to progress
in the first place? Keeping in mind everything said about indications of the
content above, Hegel's simple reply to that question is:

> What propels the concept onward is the already mentioned negative which it
> possesses in itself; it is this that constitutes the truly dialectical factor
> (Hegel 2010, 34/21.39).

Here there are two elements which, although often intertwined, are subtly
distinct: the negative and the dialectic. The dialectic has a rich lineage in
the history of philosophy and Hegel draws some key comparisons between his usage
and that of Plato and Kant. Before turning to that discussion, it is worthwhile
to keep in mind how the negative and the dialectic are distinct.

While no detailed examination can take place of these terms here, some cursory
remarks and images can be helpful. When speaking of Hegel's dialectic, consider
the negative as a moment of something that activates its transformation into
something other. What makes this change particularly _dialectical_ is the fact
that the change is purely internal. The thing in question simply changes on its
own account, like a piston engine that is able generate its own pressure to
create motion, or, perhaps more appropriately, a heart that generates the pulse
necessary for the support system of the heart to in turn keep beating. Now, in
absolutely strict terms, one might determine that what the thing first is and
then becomes are essentially two different things, such that there is really no
change, much less dialectic, since the thing is no longer the same thing should
there be any new anything. So it is required inasmuch as something is understood
dialectically that the thing in question minimally retains an identity in spite
of difference. Moreover, in thinking of dialectic as change, this change entails
many categories working together: constitutive moments, spontaneous or
self-determined negative moment, integration of that negative moment into a
whole. One can see how this idea quickly reveals a wealth of determinations.

Like with all other terms and notions at the start of _The Science of Logic_,
dialectic itself is unproven and Hegel must show something to develop
dialectically before he is justified in using that term as well as making it
meaningful. Indeed, even the important `negative` must develop immanently. As
indicated above, dialectic might not exist since what appears as change is
really two entirely different things, and this kind of challenge is something
that Hegel's argument must be capable of responding to.

Turning now to the historical appreciation of the term dialectic, Hegel notes
that, since the time of Plato and Socrates, that dialectic has signified an
external activity concerned with rooting out what is misplaced or erroneously
conceited about something. When the truth of the matter is settled, dialectic no
longer plays any vital role and can be dismissed from the revised concept. It is
in this way that dialectic is considered as something merely subjective and
associated with dissolving shallow and brittle conceptions.

Hegel praises Kant for discovering that dialectic is not an external and
arbitrary movement but is integral to the functioning of reason. Dialectic, with
Kant, ceases to play a merely optional role but is necessary to the idea of
reason as such. Whether for good or ill, then, conceit&mdash;or how something
_merely_ appears&mdash;surrounding the determinations of thought are vital to
thought itself. Hegel goes on at length:

> ...the general idea to which [Kant] gave gave justification and credence is
> the _objectivity of reflective shine_ and the _necessity of the contradiction_
> which belongs to the _nature_ of thought determinations ... [that] such
> determinations are in reason, and with reference to what is in itself, this is
> precisely their nature. This result, _grasped_ in _its positive aspect_, is
> nothing else but the _inner negativity_ of the determinations which is their
> self-moving soul, the principle of all natural and spiritual life (Hegel 2010,
> 35/21.40).

By _objectivity of reflective shine_, Hegel means that how things _appear_, not
only as they are in and for themselves, is understood to be objectively valid.
That is to say, that appearances gain the status of forming part of reality and
not merely obfuscating it as if they were only a veil that could be permanently
pulled back. Hegel then adds the conclusion that, if appearances are integral to
reality, then reality itself has an inner negativity whereby it is in opposition
with itself between these two determinations, namely, what _is_ the case and
what _seems_ to be case. Or, put differently, the thing is internally disjointed
between how it appears and how it really is. Furthermore, this opposition or
internal negativity is considered positive since it is through this divergence
or conflict that difference (or movement) is engendered. As Hegel confirms: "It
is in this dialectic as understood here, and hence in grasping opposites in
their unity, or the positive in te negative, that _the speculative_ consists"
(Hegel 2010, 35/21.41).

The speculative here being nothing less than the name of the kind of
self-critical philosophy Hegel, and others, engage in that are sensitive to the
movement of the determinations of thought and understand this movement to be
necessary to the content as it is in its truth.

{/* Future sections to consider: the meaning of logic as the realm of shadows. */}
